Genesis chapter number one this evening, Genesis chapter number one, we'll be looking at verses
14 through 19 as we look at the fourth day of creation.
And let me read the text of scripture to you.
We'll get into the message this evening.
Genesis 1, 14 through 19, beginning in verse number 14, and God said, let there be lights
in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night, and let them be for signs
and for seasons and for days and years.
Verse 15, and let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon
the earth, and it was so.
And God made two great lights, the greater light to rule the day and the lesser light
to rule the night.
He made the stars also, and God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light
upon the earth, and to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from
the darkness.
And God saw that it was good, and the evening and the morning were the fourth day.
Obviously, as we've studied the book of Genesis up to this point, we've looked at the days
of creation, the wisdom and power of God has been on display.
We have had the opportunity to see the repeated phrase throughout the text of Scripture where
the Bible says, God said, and it was so.
And we get to see the power of God and the wisdom of God.
We have discussed the stability of God's creation and the suitability for life.
God in His wisdom, in His divine wisdom and power, He created that which was stable but
also sustainable for life, suitable for life.
We've noticed the recurring use of the word, and, throughout Genesis chapter number one,
which of course would help us to understand as it would indicate the successive nature
of the recorded events.
This record provides us with the truth of creation and how God literally created everything
in six days, 24-hour literal days that God used that first week of creation.
Now we find ourselves on day number four.
Remember on day number one, we found that God created light.
That was the energy.
We dealt with the fact that God is light.
He said there in verse number three, God said, let there be light, and there was light.
We noted that on day number one, God did not create the sun, the moon, and the stars.
That would not be until our study this evening, day number four, but He did create light and
He did set in motion the day-night cycle that we have today.
You find that even there on the first day, He says that God called the light day and
the darkness He called night, and the evening and the morning were the first day.
We find that that continued for day one, two, and three, and now on day number four, God
is going to create, He's going to, in His wisdom and in His power, we're going to find
that He then creates the sun, the moon, and the stars, as it's recorded here, but on day
number one, the light, the energy, day number two, the firmament, we dealt with that, how
He divided the waters, and then we found that through the division of the waters, of course,
He was setting up the suitability for life upon planet Earth.
And as He divided those waters, we find that He, in His wisdom, was ensuring that planet
Earth would be able to be conducive for life, and not just for life, but an abundance of
life.
And then we come to day number three, as we studied last Sunday evening, when He created
the dry lands.
Remember, He commanded the seas, the waters, excuse me, He commanded the waters to gather
into one place.
He called the land, as it appeared, as the dry appeared, He called it land, and then
He, of course, called it Earth in verse number 10, and God called the dry land Earth.
And gathering together the waters, He called seas, and it said there also on day number
three that God saw that it was good.
He continued, and of course, He created the plant life, as we discussed last week, and
it was in that creation of the plant life that we find the creation, the mature nature
of creation, not only the maturation that we see through the creation of God, but also
we notice for the first time that phraseology after His kind, and how God had determined
that not only would He create life, and here creating the plant life, but that He provided
the means for reproduction, for sustainability.
We come to day number four, and we find in verse number 14 through 19 that God records
for us here this account of the creation on day number four.
We find again that we begin the fourth day of creation with those words, and God said.
And God said.
I'm reminded of a verse that we've often referenced in Psalm 33 and verse number 9, where the
Bible says, for He spake, and it was done, He commanded, and it stood fast.
And it literally here, as we find in verse number 14, and God said.
And what did He say?
Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven.
We'll look at the remainder of the text as we move forward, but I want you to understand,
you don't need to turn there.
I'm going to read a couple of verses from the book of Psalms for you.
We've made this statement over and over throughout our study of the book of Genesis, that the
creation account is not isolated just to the first few chapters of the book of Genesis.
In fact, we spent the second study of our study through the book of Genesis by referring
to a number of verses throughout the word of God that deal with the subject of creation
to show us that it's not just a Genesis thing or even an Old Testament thing.
It's a Bible truth.
And there are some that would criticize the idea of creation, say, oh, that's just reserved
to the first few chapters of Genesis, and Moses isn't a trusted source, and so on and
so forth.
First of all, God used Moses to write it, but it's the word of God, amen?
And we find that creation is recorded throughout the word of God, and here's what the psalmist
says in Psalm 8 and verse number 3, when I consider thy heavens, amen, it's God's,
he says this, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained.
Psalm 136 verses 5 through 9, the psalmist says here in this text of scripture, to him
that by wisdom made the heavens, for his mercy endureth forever.
To him that stretched out the earth above the waters, for his mercy endureth forever.
To him that made the great lights, for his mercy endureth forever.
The sun to rule by day, for his mercy endureth forever.
The moon and stars to rule by night, for his mercy endureth forever.
Look at some other verses as we go throughout the study this evening, but we find that God
said there on day number 4, as we begin in verse number 14, let there be lights in the
firmament of the heaven.
We find that God has in his wisdom and in his power, his power was to speak it into
existence, God said let there be, and he goes through, but he provides for us the place
of these lights.
God set them in specific space, in a specific place, and as we think about the place, in
verse number 14 it says let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven.
We'll look at some of the purpose here in just a moment, but we find that it says again
in verse number 15, let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven, and then again
in verse number 17, and God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon
the earth.
There's no randomness in how God placed, where he placed the sun and the moon and the stars.
We find that as we think about the purpose of this creation event that took place on
day number 4, then obviously there had to be a specific place in order for these bodies
to be placed, the sun and the moon and the stars.
In fact, there's an interesting study, I'm not going to get into the details this evening,
I spent some of the time on this in the first night of looking at this particular study,
how specifically designed the universe is and where the earth is in relation to the
sun, and just a small change of one way or the other in how it would not support life
and so on and so forth, and you can see how that God had set a specific place.
And not only a specific place, but we see that there's a purpose.
I'm thankful that our God is a God of order and a God of purpose.
And we see this, see what's happening in the Genesis account is God is revealing to us
this truth of creation, but in revealing to us this truth of creation, he's also revealing
to us his attributes.
He's revealing to us that he is omnipotent.
He's revealing to us that he's omniscient, he's revealing to us that he has purpose.
There's no randomness with God, there is purpose with God, and as we study the Genesis account,
we begin to get some insight as to the character of God.
Remember, the Bible doesn't try to prove God, the Bible simply declares God.
In the beginning, God.
Who is this God?
Well, he's going to reveal himself to you if you continue reading, amen?
And you continue reading even in the first chapter of the book of Genesis, and you begin
to understand some about the God that created and about the God that is given to us throughout
the word of God, our creator and our redeemer.
We find that the purpose of the lights, he made there two great lights, the Bible starts
with there in verse number 16, speaking about the two great lights, but notice what he says
in verse number 14.
He says this, let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven, for what purpose?
To divide the day from the night, and let them, that's these lights that he's speaking
about creating, be for signs and for seasons and for days and years.
There was a purpose.
Now, we understand as we would read from day number one, two, and three.
that there was that day-night cycle that God had instituted to show us the
creation week as he created light, energy, and there was that rotation, there was
the the truth of the day, excuse me, the light he called day, the darkness he
called night, but now he takes that energy and he's going to place it in a
specific place. We know the Sun as he speaks about the greater of the two
there in verse number 16, and God made two great lights, the greater light to
rule the day and the lesser light to rule the night, and we find that God
then continues this cycle that started on day number one, but now it's going to
provide not just for the day-night cycle, but he says let it be for signs, for
seasons, for days, and for years. There would be, this is God's clock so to speak,
and it provides navigational assistance. You think about the stars and so on and
so forth, but you think about the time that would be understood through the
creation and God saying it's for signs, it's for seasons, for days, and for years.
I mentioned in our very first study, and as we looked at that first study, we
talked about the way in which the earth rotated and so on and so forth, and we
talked about the journey that the earth would take around the Sun and how that
journey, being such a lengthy journey, 584 million miles, and it takes 365 and a
quarter days, and you think about how that he's saying here the Sun, the moon,
and the stars, they're for signs, seasons, days, and years, and it's interesting
because when we look at that truth of how long it takes the earth to make its
journey around the Sun, they have measured this, they have studied this for
a number of years, and it is consistent to about one thousandth of a second. Now
think about that. Year after year after year after year after year of observing
and measuring, it takes 365 and a quarter days, and it is consistent to about
one thousandth of a second. Just happened? Come on. It reveals that we have a
Creator. God did it. Amen? And God created, and we find that he says here's the
purpose. They were for markers for seasons and days and years to identify
the passage of time. We find that with such purpose there would be a
requirement that there'd be stability, right? If God says here's the purpose for
me creating the Sun, the moon, and the stars, then we would find that there
needs to be some stability. Now we've already mentioned and we've proven many
times already through our study that God created a stable creation. We think
about the stability that God has given many people that would offer up other
ideas about the origin of life, the origin of man, and so on and so forth.
It's a question that so many people attempt to answer. They always start with
something, and there's really a hard time proving wherever that something came
from. What made it act that way? What made it do that thing? Well, see, behind the
creation account is a Creator God who's omniscient and omnipotent, and he's the
one that holds all the things together. Amen? And we find that it's by the power
of his Word. We dealt with that last week, and we looked at that quite extensively,
but I want you to notice that in the the psalmist says this in Psalm 104 and
verse number 19, as we think about the stability of God's creation and we think
about the purpose that it would be for markers, for signs, for the seasons, for
days, for years, that it would require, it would be inherent in
there, that there would have to be some level of stability. The greater light, of
course, according to verse number 16, was to rule the day, and that's, of course, the
sun. The lesser light to rule the night, the moon, and we know that, of course, the
heat source, and so on and so forth. By the way, it's a very small fraction of
the actual energy of the sun that actually reaches the earth. It's amazing
how minute of a fraction of that energy actually reaches the earth, and how it's
perfectly designed by God. And we find here that the the moon, by the way, it has
a very controlling the tides, right? You think about the tidal impact of the moon.
If the moon were larger or smaller or further or closer, it would mess that
whole thing up. God placed it exactly where it needed to be placed. In Psalm 104 and
verse number 19, the Bible says this, he appointed the moon for seasons, the sun
knoweth his going down. Now, there are some that would try to critique the Bible
and say, well, the sun doesn't actually go down. And we know that there's some
arguments that people would like to bring to us and try to naysayers and
scoffers and so on and so forth. The reality is that mankind, for a number of
centuries, has spoken about the sunset and the sunrise. We speak about it daily,
right? On your phones, it talks about what time the sun's gonna set, what time
it's gonna rise. We can go to that, but the reality is that that's the
vernacular that we use because that's what it appears to be, right? We talk
about, oh, that's a breathtaking sunset. The sun didn't move, but from our
perspective of being here on earth, we think you can see the sun moving, right? I
mean, it was over here a few hours ago and now it's over there. The sun
didn't move. We rotated, but we can't feel the rotation, right? I mean, I can't feel
it. Can you feel it? I've often wished that when I went running that I could
feel the rotation and it'd go a little faster for me, you know, and I thought
that'd be an excellent thing, but the reality is it doesn't work that way. God
made us so that we could be on this planet Earth and deal with that rotation
and not even know about it. Isn't that amazing? It's amazing, and so we find here that
God created us and we see the place, we see the purpose. I want to note something
here in verse number 16. The Bible says this, and God made two great lights, the
greater light to rule the day and the lesser light to rule the night, but look
at the last five words. He made the stars also. I'm telling you, it blows my mind.
Absolutely blows my mind when I read verse number 16, the last five words. He
made the stars also. You understand that there are billions and billions of stars,
and probably beyond that there are billions and billions of stars, but
here's the thing. God summarizes all of that in five words, but notice what he
says about the stars. In Hebrews 11 and verse number 12, he mentions that the
stars, is he giving a promise there concerning really a record of the
promise that had been given to Abraham and to Sarah. It says in Hebrews 11 and
verse number 12, therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so
many as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand which is by
the seashore innumerable, but I want you to see a verse in Psalms. Turn over to
Psalm 147, if you will, and I'm going to give you a moment to turn there, and as
you're turning there, we find that there are billions and billions of stars. The
account there in Hebrews says they're innumerable. Have you ever tried to count
the stars? I remember when I was probably 11 years old, we lived in North Carolina,
and I remember we lived on the corner house there, and as we, there was another
corner that we lived right at the, actually at the time that we lived there
was a dead-end street to the one side, and there's another corner house over
here, and I remember going outside one evening and seeing the neighbor over
there, I can't remember what his name was, it was after Andrew and them moved away,
and it was the next couple that moved in there, Sam and Luana, their son, whatever
his name was, and he was outside. He was about four or five years older than I
was, and he's outside, and he's out here like this, and he's going like this, and
I'm just like 11 year old kid, and I said, what are you doing? He said, you just
messed me up. I said, messed you up from what? He said, I'm counting the stars, and I
kind of thought, how did I mess you up counting the stars, man? You're not
counting the stars. In fact, how many of you have been to some places out west or
higher elevations, and you can see a whole lot more stars there than you can
hear? When Holly and I went out to Arizona for our 10th wedding anniversary
a number of years ago now, we went out there and we were staying in Sedona.
Sedona has all kinds of rules about lighting and so on and so forth, and
signs for restaurants and other things they can't be higher than a certain
number of feet off the ground because they don't want any light, because they
want it to be as dark as possible, which kind of concerned me because they got
rattlesnakes out there so you can't see real well where you're walking. I think
about crazy things. I really do, and I'm like, man, this is a bad situation
because you can't see anything, but the reality is you could see so many stars.
It was amazing, and so we find that the Bible says that he made
the stars also, innumerable, but look at Psalm 147, look at verse number four. He
telleth the number of the stars, he calleth them, what's the next word, all by
their names. Let it sink in for a minute.
the stars also billions upon billions innumerable according to what Hebrew
says from our perspective but God knows the very number of them and he calls
them by their names now I'm not much for honestly it's just not my day I can tell
you where the Big Dipper is a little dipper but on that I got nothing I'm
just being honest with you there's some apps on your phone that you can get and
supposedly look up there and it will tell you what you're looking at and so
on and so forth I'm just not it's not my thing but God calls them all here's the
amazing thing now listen obviously it's God that created amen obviously if God
wanted to he could have given us a whole lot more detail right do you agree with
that he's the one that did it right if you were to ask Doug made this board
over here our missions map one of the preachers that was at the meeting
yesterday he was telling his wife about our missions map even though they were
at that church he was looking at the missions map they had their walk he's
like you got to see brother man it's amazing and he's telling all about this
thing right and see if you asked like how did you make that he could say oh I
just spent some time if he gave you all the details it just kind of blow your
mind God did it he could have given us great detail as to how he did it and how
many he did and all he could have given us all right but his ways are not our
ways he transcends us we're finite he's infinite but we also think about this
truth and it's a preacher of yesteryear who made this statement John Phillips
and I think it's an amazing an amazing observation that John Phillips made he
said this God is more interested in people than planets in souls than stars
to create he had to speak but to redeem he had to suffer see the Word of God the
Bible we find that the the theme if you will of the Bible is redemption the
Bible speaks of science and everywhere that it speaks about science it's
accurate and it's trustworthy and we take God at his word at what he said but
it is not a science textbook you can think about five words he made the stars
also you can read chapters about the tabernacle I mean much detail about one
piece of furniture in the tabernacle you can read chapters upon chapters on the
life of David the last 12 of the last 13 chapters the book of Genesis they deal
with the life of Joseph 12 of the last 13 chapters of the book of Genesis deal
with Joseph and God said he made the stars also why because God is interested
in his plan of redemption right and he's revealing to this is what God did
he created but this is the plan that God has for mankind one I think it's William
Scroggie is the the preacher's name of yesteryear a great theologian and
William Scroggie wrote a book that's entitled the unfolding drama of
redemption now it's about twice as thick of your as your Bible is I mean it's a
huge volume work that he did it's called the unfolding drama redemption
it's an excellent book and and what he deals with is that the the main
character of the Bible is Jesus Christ God's Son and the main theme of the
Bible is redemption and it's the Old Testament that tells us about the
Redeemer who was going to come it's the gospel record that provides for us the
coming of the Messiah of the Redeemer and then the rest of the New Testament
gives us instruction for how we're to live because of what he did and then it
tells us how he's coming back it's amazing you think about the Bible and so
when we look at the creation account we say this is exactly God did exactly what
he said but some people well I want more details well God didn't choose to give
them all to us but let me just rest in the fact that he knows how many there
are and he knows their names that's good enough for me amen praise the Lord and
then somebody says this well some of those stars are so many billion light
years away and so how can we see the how can we see the light from the stars
doesn't we're here anyway so that how can we see the light from the stars if
there are billions of light years away and yet the earth isn't that old no
one's ever heard that question it's a question that gets asked often have you
heard it in school anyone mentioned that you just like what are you talking
about remember the the the truth of creation is that God created things in a
mature state is it really beyond the ability of our God to create a star
light years away but let the light be visible where where we are here on earth
he did it for a purpose of seat of seasons right the the days and the years
so therefore obviously when man would come on earth in a couple of days
creation wise right day number six man comes on the earth the the light from
the stars has to be visible God knew that and so God designed it he created
it that way that's not too hard for God but there are people that have brains
much I mean their IQs are much harder than I and they wrestle and wrestle and
wrestle and try to figure it all out and here's why they don't want to
acknowledge God that's the whole issue they don't want to acknowledge God so we
find here so they say well there's no way it could happen because there's God
is able nothing is beyond his ability and so he stretches out the heavens he
did the work of creation and we find that he's not giving us a textbook on
how he did the creation he's simply declaring to us what he did and then
showing us his plan for mankind because he's more interested in people than he
is in planets as John Phillips said now notice this the Bible tells us here
about the creation of these lights the Sun the moon and the stars notice with
me not necessarily from this text of scripture we'll look at a few other
text of scriptures that the Sun the moon and the stars were not created to be
worshipped but they were created to point us to the Creator there are a
number of people even still today that worship this they look for signs in the
heavens but you know what the heavens declare Psalm 19 one the glory of God
God didn't make the Sun moon and stars so that man would worship them God made
the Sun moon and stars so that it would reveal the Creator to them it's
unfortunate but there was warning given to the nation of Israel regarding this
false idol worship turn to the book of Deuteronomy if you will in chapter
number 17 and we'll look at not only did God give them warning with regard to
this false worship and that the Sun moon and stars were not designed to be
worshipped we find that the nation of Israel actually though they had been
warned they fell into that very trap Deuteronomy chapter number 17 I'll be
reading verses 1 through 7 of course as you understand the timing of the writing
of Deuteronomy God is giving the instruction through Moses for the
children of Israel that would go in to inherit the land and habit the land they
had a twofold problem number one they had been influenced by a lot of things
from Egypt number two they were going to go into a land that was a heathen land
that served a bunch of false gods and so God was warning them repeatedly
throughout the book of Deuteronomy don't do what you did in or what you saw in
Egypt and don't do what you find there God's just giving on that warning and
here in Deuteronomy 17 verse 1 thou shalt not sacrifice from the Lord thy
God any bullock or sheep wherein is blemish or any evil favoredness for that
is an abomination of the Lord thy God and we find you know the children of
Israel guilty of that as well Malachi they were doing that they were bringing
things oh this isn't any good for me so we'll offer it to the Lord no God wants
your best he wants somebody said this he wants what's right not what's left
that's a pretty good statement verse 2 if there be found among you within any
any of the gates which the Lord thy God giveth thee man or woman that hath wrought
wickedness in the sight of the Lord thy God in transgressing his covenant verse
3 and if gone and served other gods and worshiped them look at this either the
sun or moon or any of the host of heaven which I have not commanded and to
be told thee and thou hast heard of it and inquired diligently and behold it be
true and the thing certain that such abomination is wrought in Israel then
shalt thou bring forth that man or that woman which have committed that wicked
thing unto thy gates even that man or that woman and shalt stone them with
stones till they die at the mouth of two witnesses or three witnesses shall he
that is worthy of death be put to death but at the mouth of one witness he
shall not be put to death the hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him
that put him to death and afterward the hands of all the people so thou should
put evil away from among you does that sound pretty serious to you what what's
gonna say I didn't create them for you to worship amen
Exodus 20 records for us the Ten Commandments right you should have no
other gods before me zero none no graven images right we find it God tells
them that he's a jealous God the creation is not to be worshipped the
creation
points to the Creator, who alone is worthy of our worship. I told you that
the children of Israel were guilty. Here the warning is given to us in Deuteronomy
17. Look over in the book of Ezekiel, if you will, in chapter number 8. I'll give
you a moment to turn there, Ezekiel chapter number 8. I wish I could go
through all of Ezekiel 8, because it's amazing what God reveals to Ezekiel in
this particular passage of Scripture. I mean, if you have time this week, read
Ezekiel 8, honestly. It's a powerful passage of Scripture. Not all of it deals
with what I'm dealing with this evening, but the wickedness that was there that
God revealed to Ezekiel. But notice with me, we'll pick it up in verse number 16
here of Ezekiel 8. The Bible says this, and he brought me into the inner court
of the Lord's house. Now just stop there and think about that. The inner court of
the Lord's house. Whose house? The Lord's house. And behold, at the door of the
temple of the Lord, between the porch and the altar were about five and twenty men
with their backs toward the temple of the Lord and their faces toward the
east, and they worshipped the Son toward the east. They did what? They worshipped
the Son. Now the warning that was given in Deuteronomy, a pretty strict warning and
pretty severe consequences. And God reveals to Ezekiel of this wickedness
that is taking place. They have their backs toward the temple of the Lord,
their faces are toward the east, and they worship the Son toward the east. Then
said he unto me, verse number 17, hast thou seen this, O son of man? Is it a
light thing to the house of Judah that they commit the abominations which they
commit here? For they have filled the land with violence and have returned to
provoke me to anger. And lo, they put the branch on their nose. Therefore will I
also deal in fury. Mine eyes shall not spare, neither will I have pity. And
though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them. See, the
problem is given to us in verse number 12. I told you I wasn't gonna read all of
it, but I got to just share with you verse number 12. Then said he unto me,
Son of man, hast thou seen what the ancients of the house of Israel do in
the dark? Every man in the chambers of his imagery, for they say, the Lord seeth
us not. The Lord hath forsaken the earth. The eyes of the Lord are everywhere. Amen?
He's omniscient. He knows all things. He sees all things. He's omnipresent. And
here what's taking place is they were involved in some wickedness, worshiping
the Son, but they think they're doing it in secret and God doesn't know about it,
but God's revealing it to Ezekiel. I mean, we could preach a whole message
from Ezekiel 8, totally different subject, but let's just keep moving on with
Genesis 1. I want you to notice back in Genesis chapter 1 that these lights
that God had created, the sun, the moon, the stars, He put them in a place, He gave
them purpose. We find that the Bible says at the end of verse number 18, well let's
read all of 18, and to rule over the day and over the night. Divide the light from
the darkness, notice the last words here, and God saw that it was good. God saw
that it was good. God said it was so, we see that in verse 14, at the end of verse
number 15, then we see at the end of verse number 18, and God saw that it was good.
Because everything that God does is good. Amen? David declared in Psalm 34,
taste and see that the Lord is good. His ways are perfect, everything he does is
good, and thus concludes day number four of creation, verse 19, that the evening
and the morning were the fourth day. It's an amazing amount of substance to what
took place on day number four, and God gives it to us, and He once again reveals
to us His omnipotence, His power, and His wisdom, His omniscience. Our God is an
awesome God, and what He created, He had order in it, it's perfectly designed with
a perfect purpose, it's going to, it's sustainable. Listen, I don't care what
the politicians say, it's going to be until God says, it will be destroyed one
day according to 2 Peter 3, but it's going to be destroyed on God's timetable.
Amen? And we find here that it's sustainable, and it does what it's
supposed to do, because God is the the designer, He's the creator. It's not to
be worshipped, it is to point us to the creator who is worthy, who is alone
worthy of our worship, because the heavens declare the glory of God. The
firmament showeth forth His handiwork, Psalm 19 and verse number 1. Let's pray
together. Father, we love you, we thank you for loving us this evening, we thank
you for the Word of God, thank you for the truth that's given to us in your Word
concerning creation. We find, even as we look this evening, how wonderful you are.